It was the season of maize! Every school going child would pack some roasted maize cobs in his kaveera – the same one where he carried his 32 –page flamingo books. The young soul was no exception. He would walk three kilometers to his primary school, always reaching when the maize was magically gone – fuel in the tank. Like many others.

On this fateful day, it was shikhong'ongo day. The young lad had no idea what it was or what it meant or that that day was that day. On reaching the school compound, pieces of eaten up maize cobs were flying furiously in the air - with wanton glory!

There was pandemonium! Everyone seemed to be screaming and the teachers were all under cover. No piece of maize cob was to be left lying idly on the ground, it was a weapon to be hurled as the pupil you disliked most - not, or the one you perhaps just wanted to hit- and laugh!

Amidst all the confusion the young lad was anxiously taking in the scene, and soon he was caught in the fracas - like a man possessed by a force he wouldn't resist. The war raged on, the injured sought cover in the class rooms, but even then they were not safe. The projectiles would equally fly through the windows (opening where windows were supposed to be installed).

Not a teacher dared come forth to stop the "indiscipline, the habitual uncivilized behaviors". In the war of maize cobs, the teachers where the main targets, together with the prefects and any other person of interest - like a boy whom another boy suspected of taking his girl.

Four hours later peace broke. A cease fire of sorts. The fun was done. The hands tired. The uniforms sweaty and dirty. The minds hungry. The spirit of shikhong'ongo was done -gone! Till another time, another maize season perhaps.

The young lad had learnt a war lesson. O' how he wished he hadn't thrown his combs as he came to school. With sore eyes, and dirt stamps on his uniform he dragged himself to their class, primary 3. A disciplined young lad was still at loss though, of the meaning of the events that had just occurred.

The assembly bell rang, a giant car tyre rim hang on a mango tree, the school gong. Every pupil lined up according to their class. The national anthem was sang, the school anthem chorusly also, and finally the the national prayer - all mere choruses to the young soul.

The teacher on duty spoke - shouting at the top of his voice. Line by line from primary one to primary seven. "If your uniform has dirt marks, step forward". Proof of guilt. That was a memorable day. For two hours the canes talked, the buttocks endured, a minimum of 10 canes per guilty head.

The young lad looked around when line three was announced. He had not participated in the projectile launching, but he had dirt marks. He couldn't remember amidst the fear. Guilty. The cane bit hard. Teary eyes attracted no sympathy - instead a bonus cane to teach him to be a brave man. Men don't cry.

That fateful May day. The season of maize. Way before the folklore of the Y2k end of the world saga was spoken of.
